---
Title: Impact and influence of the natural *Vibrio*-squid symbiosis in understanding bacterial-animal interactions  
Date: \today  
...

# Abstract

Animals are colonized by bacteria and in many cases partners have co-evolved to perform mutually beneficial functions. An exciting and ongoing legacy of the past decade has been an expansion of technology to enable study of natural associations *in situ* (*in vivo*). As a result more symbioses are being examined, and additional details are being revealed for well-studied systems with a focus on the interactions between partners in the native context. With this framing, we review literature from the *Vibrio fischeri*-*Euprymna scolopes* symbiosis and focus on key studies that have had an impact on understanding bacteria-animal interactions broadly. This is not intended to be a comprehensive review of the system, but rather to focus on particular studies, discuss the key findings of the work, and to highlight connections with other symbiotic systems. Here we discuss how bacteria influence animal development; how microbial developmental biology regulates developmental transitions; the nature of molecular dialogue between bacteria and their animal hosts; how small genetic changes can have large effects on host colonization specificity; and how bacterial metabolism is constrained by the host environment and life cycle. Overall these studies demonstrate how functional approaches *in vivo* in a tractable system have provided valuable insight into general principles of microbe-host interactions.

# Introduction

Studies of human, animal, and plant microbiomes have been enabled by novel culture-independent approaches and technological advancements in DNA sequencing. In recent years a prominent role for microbial communities in the gut, skin, and other organs in human health has emerged. These studies followed from influential animal studies in systems that continue to yield valuable insight into microbiome assembly, stability, communication, and evolution. The focus of this review is to examine one model system and to examine how key findings in that system have enabled an increasingly higher resolution of the processes and principles that undelie microbe-host communication.

When Hawaiian bobtail squid hatch from their eggs, they are exposed to millions of microbes in each milliliter of seawater. Although *V. fischeri* make up less than 1 in 5,000 of these planktonic, environmental bacteria, the "light organ" of the hatchling squid becomes colonized exclusively with *V. fischeri*. This incredible specificity relies on a series of reciprocal communications between microbe and host, many of which are detailed in the sections below. Over the course of 48 h the bacteria establish a mature colonization in the squid crypts and, at high cell density, produce light as a result of quorum-sensing. The bacterial bioluminescence is reflected by host tissue to camouflage the shadow or silhouette that the noctural-foraging squid would case in the moonlight, thus protecting the host in a process termed counterillumination. The colonization procedure occurs only in hatchling squid, seeding an individual host's crypts for its lifetime. The bacteria produce light at night, and at dawn approximately 90-95% of the symbiotic population is expelled into the seawater. The remaining cells grow up during the day, produce light at night, and the diel cycle proceeds. Host cellular changes accompany this cycle, for example with a daily reshaping of the epithelial brush border against which the bacteria reside during the final two hours prior to the daily expulsion/venting [@wier2010].

As an environmentally-transmitted symbiosis, the *Vibrio*-squid model has a number of valuable characteristics that have served it well as a study system for identifying molecular mechanisms. First, the binary system has only two partners and is therefore naturally reduced. Second, both partners can be raised separately and then introduced for experimentation. Third, *V. fischeri* is genetically tractable, and both unbiased mutagenesis approaches as well as precise genetic alterations can be introduced with relative ease. Fourth, the bacteria colonize the host light organ directly under the semi-transparent mantle and funnel; dissection of these tissues in anesthetized animals permits imaging of the site of infection and direct analysis of bacterial behaviors and host responses. Fifth, synchronous colonization of hatchling has permitted developmental staging of the colonization process. For most of the processes described below, many of these benefits were important to making the advance.

# From pattern to process in the *Vibrio*-squid system

In each section below, we highlight key discoveries in the *Vibrio*-squid symbiosis from the past three decades with a specific focus on how this model system has revealed processes that are important broadly in bacterial colonization.

## Giving up some of myself to let you know I'm here

*E. scolopes* squid provide a particularly dramatic example of a role for bacteria influencing a specific host developmental process. Development of the host tissue proceeds on different trajectories depending on whether the specific symbiont *V. fischeri* is present; only once the symbiont has colonized, the ciliated appendages of the host light organ undergo apoptosis regression during the subsequent five days [@mcfall-ngai1991, @montgomery1994]. The bacterial peptidoglycan fragment, tracheal cytotoxin (TCT), which previously had been shown to induce a damaging apoptosis in ciliated epithelia upon release from *Bordetella pertusis*, was identified to perform a similar function in *V. fischeri*, but this time with a resulting beneficial outcome [@koropatnick2004]. The Lipid A portion of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is required in conjuction with TCT to recapitulate the apoptosis phenotype observed when intact *V. fischeri* are presented to the host. The cell death from these compounds, in conjunction with hemocyte trafficking that is also induced from TCT, results in the regression phenotype.

Once the bacteria announce their arrival, how does the host speak back? In addition to apoptosis and regression of the appendages that recruit the bacteria there are additional mechanisms by which the host receives and likely modulates the bacterial signal. Host nitric oxide production, described in more detail below, is diminished as a result of bacterial signaling (synergistically with LPS) [@altura2011]. The host produces a peptidoglycan recognition protein, EsPGRP2, which is secreted into the crypts containing bacteria, and that has the ability to degrade TCT [@troll2010]. Additionally, there are data to suggest that host alkaline phosphatase, EsAP, modifies Lipid A after the initial signaling [@rader2012]. In each case the host response is to diminish the effect of the bacterial products, but only after they have exerted their influence on host development.

This work in *V. fischeri* was influenced by studies in invertebrate systems that demonstrated host development in response to symbiont colonization and vertebrates that showed general responses to consortia (reviewed in [@montgomery1994]). Following up on this work to define specific compounds that influenced host development, studies in other systems began to look critically at the molecular interface between microbes and host. In 2001 it was shown in a mammalian system that in response to colonization by gut *Bacteroidetes* such as *Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron*, terminal tissue differentiation (e.g., fucosylation) is dependent on the presence of the symbiotic bacteria [@hooper2001a]. There now exist many examples of bacteria directing specific host development. Two recent exciting examples include *Algoriphagus machipongonensis* sulfonolipid signaling for multicellular rosette development in the choanoflagellate *Salpingoeca rosetta*, and *Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea* phage tail-like structures that stimulate tubeworm metamorphosis [@alegado2012, @shikuma2016].


## Light up my life

An important aspect to mutualistic symbioses is the selection of appropriate and cooperative partners.  In theory, these relationships could be exploited by partners that are less cooperative (i.e. "cheaters") (Ghoul, 2014; PMID 24131102).  For example, in both the rhizobium-leguminous plant (Kiers, 2003; PMID 12955144) and squid-vibrio symbioses the microbial partners provide costly services to their hosts (nitrogen fixation and light production respectively).  However, it is rare to find bacterial symbionts associated with the hosts that do not provide these services ("cheaters").   The squid-vibrio mutualism provides an excellent model system for studying cooperative partner selection, and studies to date indicate that bacterial light production is required for bacterial cells to persist in the light organ.  

In 2000, Visick et al. reported a key role for luminescence in the development of the squid-vibrio symbiosis and persistence of the bacterial symbiont.  Specifically, this study demonstrated a direct role of luciferase (the enzyme that produces light) in the induction of host development and bacterial symbiotic persistence (Visick 2000).  Prior to this report, although it was known that bacteria produced light during the symbiosis, the significance of bioluminescence in the symbiosis was not clear.    By testing colonization ability of strains with mutations either in a structural luminescence gene or luminescence regulatory genes, it was discovered that these mutant strains colonized juvenile squid to the same levels as wild type in the first 24 hours.  However, by 48 hours there was a three- to four-fold reduction in colonization by the dark mutants as compared to wild type.  In addition, levels of the mutant strains also decreased in squid co-colonized with a luminescence mutant and wild type, indicating the presence of light-producing wild-type cells in the light organ could not complement the colonization defect of the light-deficient cells.  These results suggested that the ability for the bacteria to produce light was important for persistence in the light organ and that somehow the non-luminescent cells are selected against during development of the symbiosis.  

Interestingly, the light-deficient strains had a specific effect on host development.  Although colonization by a luminescence mutant still triggered apoptosis-related developmental changes in the ciliated surface of the light organ, colonization of the tissue by these strains no longer increased cell swelling of the epithelial cells lining the light organ crypt spaces.  Therefore, light production appeared to play a specific role in host developmental pathways.  Notably, this was the first report of V. fischeri genes required for induction of bacterial-triggered differentiation of host tissue.  

It was later discovered that the antibiotic markers and method for constructing the mutants used by Visick et al. (visick 2000) resulted in colonization attenuation and pleiotropic effects.  To further confirm the role of light production in symbiotic colonization, Bose et al. (Bose 2008) took advantage of newly developed tools to construct strains lacking the luminescence structural genes, as well as strains where expression of the luminescence structural genes was uncoupled from normal cell regulatory pathways.  Using these strains, the results of Visick et al were confirmed, demonstrating that the strain lacking the luminescence structural genes displayed a four-fold reduction in colonization as compared to wild type.  However, these studies were limited to the early stages of colonization due to the difficulty of raising juvenile animals to adulthood.  Previous studies had suggested that maintenance of the symbiosis over the life of the animal requires a maturation process of several weeks (Montgomery and McFall-Ngai 1998; PMID 9924775), leaving the question of how production of light influences symbiosis maturation beyond 72 hours.  

A major breakthrough for laboratories studying the system came with the development of modified protocols for simplified rearing of newly-hatched juvenile squid through and beyond the maturation process.  These methods allowed investigation of how bacterial-produced light affects the development of the symbiosis over four weeks (Koch 2013).  In these studies, the levels of the luminescence-deficient mutant associated with the squid light organ continued to decrease over time, reaching the level of detection after 28 days.  Similar results were observed in squid colonized with mixed inocula containing both wild type and the luminescence mutant, where after 15 days the mutant was barely detected.  Therefore the decreased persistence observed during early colonization becomes more pronounced as the symbiosis matures, with eventual loss (or near loss) of non-luminescent strains.  

One of the most interesting results of this work involved experiments to address the influence of a previous colonization event on recolonization by wild type.  For these experiments, juveniles were colonized with either wild type or the luminescence mutant.  After one, three, or five days the animals were treated with antibiotics to clear the bacteria from the light organ and then exposed again to wild-type V. fischeri.  This experimental design allows for testing whether particular strains "signal" to the host their suitability in terms of symbiotic light production and if this influences the maturation of the symbiotic state.  If wild-type animals were cured after one day, they were readily recolonized.  However, this was not the case if cured after five days.  In these animals a refractory state was induced by the wild-type bacteria that prevented recolonization.  In contrast, after five days greater than 80% of the animals previously colonized by the luminescence mutant were recolonized by wild type.  These results support the idea that the host is detecting light production by bacterial cells and/or is altering physiological conditions to sanction the non-luminescent strains.  In addition, the host apparently is able to "eject" an inappropriate light deficient strain, while allowing future recolonization by a symbiotically appropriate light-producing strain.     

These studies bring up interesting questions about how the animal senses the light and/or dark bacteria, how the dark strains are selected against, and the nature of the mechanism used to allow recolonization of light organs by luminescent strains after curing of strains unable to produce light.  Answers to these questions are actively being pursued, and towards the question of light sensing by the host, several recent studies have identified host cryptochrome and eye-specification genes whose expression appears to be influenced by the light produced by bacteria (Peyer et al 2014; PMID 24157521; Heath-Heckman 2013; PMID 23549919). However, it is not currently clear how this might be related to selection of light-producing strains.  Studies in plant-microbe mutualisms suggest that the host selects cooperative partners through selective resource allocation (Kiers 2003: PMID 12955144; Werner 2015; PMID 25421912).  It remains to be seen whether the squid use a similar strategy.  Deciphering the mechanisms hosts use to select microbial partners in diverse systems will be invaluable for increasing our general understanding of the requirements for effective initiation and maintenance of horizontally-transmitted symbioses.  


## NO way in

There is a long history of the study of NO in eukaryotes, and this small diffusible molecule has been implicated in many different cellular processes including signaling and innate immunity (Fang 2004, PMID 15378046).   Although the roles for NO in eukaryotic physiology and defense against pathogens was discovered many years ago, through the study of the squid-vibrio and other symbioses (Damiani 2016; PMID 27092165) it has become apparent that NO also influences the establishment and maintenance of mutualistic host-microbe relationships as both a signal and a specificity determinant (Wang and Ruby 2010; 21338463).  

A key study revealing a role for NO in animal-microbe symbioses was published by Davidson, et al. (2004).  In this work the authors demonstrated that during the initiation of colonization in the squid-vibrio system, NO is produced in host tissue through the activity of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), and this activity was attenuated after successful colonization by V. fischeri.  Using staining and immunocytochemistry NOS and NO were found located in the epithelium of the light organ, as well as in vesicles within mucus shed from these cells.  It is within this mucus that the bacterial cells aggregate prior to entering the light organ.  Treatment of the animals with a NO scavenger allowed large aggregates of non-symbiotic vibrios to form, but these bacteria did not go on to colonize.   However, in the absence of a NO scavenger V. fischeri aggregated in the mucus, went on to colonize, and after colonization NOS activity and NO production were attenuated.  The results strongly suggested that NO acts as a specificity determinant, helping to limit aggregation of non-symbiotic vibrios and select for symbiotically competent V. fischeri from the mixed microbial population found in seawater.  Of course these results also suggested that V. fischeri would need to effectively sense and respond to the host-produced NO to successfully establish the partnership.  

Since this initial report, progress has been made in determining how V. fischeri senses and responds to NO.  In 2010, Wang et al. described a role for the NO-detoxifying enzyme flavohenoglobin (Hmp) (poole and hughes, 2000; PMID 10844666) in the protection of V. fischeri from NO during host colonization.  Using genetic approaches it was demonstrated that a strain lacking hmp displayed a colonization deficiency.  Although it had been previously predicted using bioinformatic analyses (Rodionov, 2005; PMID 16261196), in this study expression of hmp was linked to the activity of a NO-responsive negative regulator NsrR ( Tucker, 2010; PMID20167493—ref about NsrR).  However, NsrR is not the only important NO-sensing regulator in V. fischeri.  H-NOX, a heme NO/oxygen-binding protein also plays a role in symbiotically relevant NO-responsive regulation of genes in V. fischeri (Wang 2010).  Although H-NOX-like proteins are widely distributed in bacteria, this was the first report describing bacterial H-NOX function.   Interestingly, it appears that one role for H-NOX in V. fischeri is to sense NO and correspondingly suppress bacterial hemin uptake during the early stages of host colonization.  The authors predicted that early repression of iron uptake would protect the cells from the potentially harmful effects of Fenton chemistry while exposed to host-generated oxidants.  This repression would then be relieved upon bacterial-influenced attenuation of oxidant production (Davidson 2004), and hemin uptake genes would be expressed to support growth in the iron-limited light organ environment (Graf and Ruby 2000).   A subsequent study demonstrated that the hemin uptake genes in V. fischeri are induced during the later stages of symbiotic colonization and deletion of these genes negatively impacted colonization (Septer 2011 PMID 21883801).   Together these results demonstrate that although the ability to sense and detoxify NO is important in terms of symbiotic specificity, NO also acts as a signal to modulate bacterial gene expression to promote successful colonization.  

Although these studies have led to a better understanding of the role of a few key proteins and regulators in the response of V. fischeri to NO and the initial stages of the symbiosis, there is much yet to be learned about the global effects of NO on V. fischeri gene expression and metabolism, how this molecule acts as a specificity determinant, and whether there is a role for NO in the mature symbiosis.  For example, the work of Wier et al. has suggested that NO may play a role in the daily symbiotic rhythm in adult animal (Wier, 2010).  Their data predicted that nitrate/nitrite respiration is used by the bacterial symbionts throughout the daylight hours.  Similarly to Escherichia coli (Vine and Cole, 2011; PMID 22029434), NO appears to be produced by V. fischeri during respiration of nitrate/nitrite in laboratory culture (A.K. Dunn, unpublished data).  These levels of NO induce alternative respiratory pathways (Dunn 2010 aox paper) that likely influence the physiology and metabolism of the bacterium.  Together these separate lines of evidence suggest that NO may play a role beyond signaling and selection in the initiation of the symbiotic relationship.  In the future it will be exciting to combine studies of NO and the bacterial NO response with the more recently developed ability to rear squid to adulthood (Koch 2013, see above section on light).  

The value of further studies of NO in the squid-vibrio system lie not only in providing important information about the role of this molecule in beneficial host-microbe interactions, but also for comparative studies to host-pathogen responses.  From our current understanding, although the outcome of the relationships is very different, it appears that although NO is being produced by the host and sensed by the bacteria in similar ways in both types of interactions (Wang and Ruby 2011; PMID 21338463; Fang 2004, PMID 15378046).  The more we learn about the intricacies of the NO response in these disparate systems, the better able we will be to understand how microbes influence host health in both positive and negative ways.  (this is a little lame, but I ran out of steam for big-picture).


## Swimming against the flow

In the mucus field that serves as the entry point for bacteria heading into the host, colonizing bacteria enter at one of three pores on either side of the bilaterally symmetrical light organ. The squid sheds mucus from the pores at the same time that *V. fischeri* aggregates in the mucus and migrates to the pores, and enters through one of them. This situation presents a number of questions about bacterial transit in a dynamic mucociliary field, including how the bacteria balance adhesion and migration; what forces control bacterial aggregation in the host environment; how the bacteria travel against this flow to enter the host; and whether the same processes in the mucus field are required in the host ducts and crypts.

How do colonizing bacteria travel against this powerful flow? A key study identifying a role for flagellar motility was conducted over twenty years ago [@ruby1993]. In that work Ruby and Asato confirmed that planktonic *V. fischeri* were motile due to a polar tuft of sheathed flagellar. However, by 24 hours post inoculation most cells in the light organ crypts were non-flagellated. Upon expulsion of bacteria from the host, the bacteria regrow their flagella in 45-60 min even in nutrient-deplete seawater [@ruby1993]. Therefore the bacterial life cycle alternates between a motile planktonic lifestyle and a non-flagellated crypt-colonized state.

Significant details have since been elucidated about the molecular mechanisms that control flagellar development in *V. fischeri*, which in turn has solidified the importance of swimming motility for squid colonization. Random transposon mutagenesis provided evidence that nonmotile mutants could not colonize [@graf1994], and reverse genetics revealed that mutants defective for flagellar motility or chemotaxis did not establish productive colonization with the squid host [@millikan2003, @millikan2004, @deloney-marino2012]. Together these studies established a model of a hierarchy of flagellar gene expression in *V. fischeri* controlled by the σ<sup>54</sup>-dependent regulator FlrA. There is evidence for regulation by quorum sensing and by magnesium, and other sensory inputs are likely [@oshea2005, @cao2012].

Bacterial flagellar motility often occurs in a directed fashion in which rotation of the flagellar bundle results in net movement toward preferred nutrient sources. Given the above information that chemotaxis was required for colonization, it seemed likely that the bacteria were swimming toward a host compound. The first evidence for chitin oligosaccharides as the specific attractant was raised when addition of exogenous chitobiose, the *N*-acetylglucosamine dimer, blocked colonization. The monomer did not have such an effect [@mandel2012]. Given that *N*-acetylglucosamine is abundant on eukaryotic cell surfaces, yet chitin and its breakdown oligosaccharides are more specialized in their localization, it seemed possible that this could be a specific cue for the host crypts. Mutants defective for chemotaxis arrested at the outer face of the light organ pore, the same stage at which wild-type *V. fischeri* arrested in the presence of added chitin oligosaccharides [@mandel2012]. These results strongly suggested that a host source of chitin was a signal for the bacteria to enter the pore. Direct imaging revealed the presence of insoluble chitin bound to hemocytes within the host [@mandel2012, @heath-heckman2011], which may be released through the action of a host endochitinase [@kremer2013]. Together, this illustrates a specific colonization checkpoint that is regulated by both host and symbiont factors.

Work on bacterial motility at the host interface has provided a valuable toolset to probe mechanisms of symbiosis and reveal novel signaling pathways. Many environmental strains have dozens of genes that encode chemotactic sensory proteins, the methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins (MCPs). The 43 proteins in *V. fischeri* is typical in this regard, and despite difficulties in studying a large protein family, functions have now been assigned to three of these proteins. VfcA is the major amino acid chemoreceptor, and VfcB and VfcB2 are fatty acid chemoreceptors [@brennan2013, @nikolakakis2016]. In addition to providing information directly about colonization, these tools have provided insight into the role of LPS during colonization and for the evolution and the generation of torque at the flagellar motor [@post2012, @beeby2016]. Furthermore, recent work has suggested that the rotation of the flagella--which is enclosed in an LPS sheath--triggers the host immune response by promoting LPS release [@brennan2014].

Satisfying answers to some of these questions are beginning to be addressed, including a role for cilia in modulating adhesion, and chemotaxis toward host-produced and host-cleaved chitin modulating a key developmental checkpoint. Still, important questions remain that suggest novel and interesting biology to be revealed through the symbiosis. Open questions include how bacteria transit through the mucus in a flagellar-independent manner; the molecular basis of chitin oligosaccharide sensing in the symbiont; and the processes that regulate the developmental switch between the aflagellate state in the host versus the swimming state in seawater.


## You talking to me?

>We were going to have a separate section below on biofilm. Perhaps we should unify it in here. I'll think about the best way to do that. Or could still have a separate section. I'll think about it quickly! Maybe a **We gotta stick together** section? key paper: Nyholm et al. 2000 [@nyholm2000]; mechanism: [@visick2001, @yip2005, @yip2006]


A 2009 study by Mandel et al. revealed that a single regulatory locus can be critical to enable an expansion of bacterial host range into a new animal host [@mandel2009].

A comparative genomic study examined differences between two *V. fischeri* strains, the squid-colonizing strain ES114 and the fish isolate MJ11 [@mandel2009]. Most of the genomes were shared with protein-coding genes that were practically identical [XXX - fill in with numbers], but approximately 400 protein-coding genes were unique to one strain or the other. Analysis of these factors revealed that the squid biofilm regulator, RscS, was encoded in the squid symbiont but not in the fish symbiont. The known RscS target genes, *sypA, sypB, ..., sypR* were encoded in both genomes and fairly conserved (> XXX % amino acid conservation). It was known previously that mutants in strain ES114 that lacked RscS are unable to productively colonize the squid [@visick2001]. Therefore, the study asked whether the absence of the regulator was sufficient to explain the differential colonization phenotype. Introduction of RscS into strain MJ11 was sufficient to allow it to colonize the squid host. Phylogenetic analyses presented supported a model in which MJ11 was part of an ancestral group of *V. fischeri* that lacked *rscS*, and that this gene was acquired coincident with squid colonization of squid in the North Pacific Ocean (i.e., Japan and Hawaii).

A single gene that was sufficient to shift the animal hosts available to a bacterium was extreme but consistent with reports that had been showing that small loci could regulate microbe-host specificity. Work in entomopathogenic nematodes had shown that symbiotic *Xenorhabdus nematophila* requires the three-gene *nilABC* locus for colonization, and that expression of these factors in a heterologous symbiont is sufficient to enable colonization of *Steinernema carpocapsae*, the worm host that otherwise is specific for *X. nematophila* [@cowles2008].
[XXX Also describe Yersinia and Rhizobia here XXX. Probably say something in this paragraph about genomic islands and Salmonella Typhimurium / Typhi.]

In the human gut microbiome there are examples in which single gene changes have been critical. XXX
- B. fragilis PSA as specificity factor [@mazmanian2008]

Horizontal gene transfer enables bacteria to gain new functions, and the V. fischeri work demonstrated the profound impact of acquisition of a single gene. A study in Japan has identified transfer of carbohydrate-degrading enzymes from seaweed to microbiota constituents [@hehemann2010].

The work by Mandel et al. [@mandel2009] revealed a single regulatory gene that can alter host range. Questions in *V. fischeri* remain as to how this gene was able to hijack a regulatory pathway, and how the evolution of signal transduction pathways occurs as interactions between host and microbe evolve. [XXX needs some work]

[could discuss host factors, NO, hemocytes & regression that likely contribute to specificity but have not been shown to in the intact animal.]


## I don't know what you are (or maybe Help! I don't know what you do?)

(The symbiosis provides a useful framework for identifying gene function)...so I was having a hard time writing about halovibrins.  The halovibrin just never really went anywhere beyond that first paper so it seemed a little orphany.   So I just wrote about aox and then mentioned eric's work and then you and John's in the beginning paragraph.  We can always tack on more stories, I was just thinking if we wanted to highlight the binK/rscS stuff you would be the one to do it.  

Studying the squid-vibrio symbiosis has provided multiple insights into the intricacies of the communication and interactions between hosts and beneficial microbial partners.  However, the system has also provided a useful framework for studying the expression of and identifying the function of interesting bacterial genes.  This value is due to the wealth of genetic tools that have been developed for V. fischeri, as well as the ability to test the effects of gene loss in a real-world environment (the host).  Although there are many examples of the use of the squid-vibrio system to broaden understanding of gene function (e.g. Stabb 2001; PMID 11114931,and Brooks and Mandel 2016), here we focus on alternative oxidase (AOX).

AOX is a terminal respiratory oxidase that is ubiquitous in plants, and is interesting because its activity is not directly linked to generation of the proton motive force (Vanlerberge and McIntosh, 1997; PMID 15012279).  The study of the function of AOX in plants is an active area of research, and AOX function has been linked to both abiotic and biotic stress responses (Vanlerberge, 2013; PMID 23531539).  Only with the explosion of genome and metagenome sequencing was it discovered that certain bacterial genomes also encode this protein (Stenmark and Nordlund 2003; PMID 14527685), and that aox-like genes are abundant in metagenomic sequences from ocean surface waters (McDonald, 2005; PMID 15777727).  However, early progress towards understanding the physiological benefit of AOX function in bacteria was limited by the lack of genetic tools for many of the organisms with AOX.  A breakthrough came with the discovery through genome sequencing that V. fischeri strain ES114, the model bacterial strain studied in the symbiosis, encoded AOX (Ruby 2005 genome paper).  In addition, through microarray study of the global NO response of V. fischeri, it was discovered that NO induced expression of aox (Wang 2010, hnox paper).   The connection to NO was further clarified through characterization of the role of the NO-responsive negative regulator NsrR in regulation of aox expression, and identification of the ability of V. fischeri AOX to function as a NO-resistant oxidase (Dunn 2010 aox paper).  To date, no discernable phenotypic difference between the aox mutant and wild type in early colonization of the squid host has been observed.  This could be considered surprising because of the known connection between aox and NO, and NO and the early stages of host colonization.  Although there is the possibility that AOX does not play a role in bacterial physiology during host colonization, an alternative explanation is that the benefit of AOX expression during colonization does not result in a phenotype dramatic enough to be observed in the short time frame of the experiments (1-3 days).  Experiments to test this possibility are in progress.    

Interestingly, work with other aox-containing bacteria suggests that the induction of aox expression in response to NO is not unique to V. fischeri (A.K. Dunn, unpublished data) and that studying AOX regulation and function in V. fischeri may provide insight into how bacteria in ocean surface waters utilize this respiratory pathway in growth and survival.  Work is currently underway to clarify the physiological benefit of AOX function in V. fischeri, with the ultimate goal of better understanding how bacteria cope with and thrive under changing conditions in the environment.   Studying AOX in the context of the symbiosis has provided insight into the expression and function of this interesting protein, and provides a framework for more broad studies of how AOX function influences bacterial physiology in the environment.  

Aox

halovibrins

(even BinK & RscS from global screens)

Maybe there are better examples...

key paper: Dunn et al. 2010 [@dunn2010]



## So that's what matters...

(The symbiosis as a focusing agent to identify relevant pathways in vivo)

Ideas:

[@wier2010] just lists of genes until modeled >> focus on glycerol and chitin. Glycerol is important in juvenile but not adults. Chitin plays many important roles...

Syp & cellulose biofilms. Both impressive in culture, both yield crystal violet phenotype, only Syp connected to host colonization.


Old ideas...

 also [@wier2010, @schwartzman2014]

aerobic/anaerobic. Day/night.

make connections to diel/circadian biology


## Conclusions

The *Vibrio*-squid system has proven to be a useful system for identifying principles of microbe-host interaction, is continuing to serve as a fertile field for discovery, and provides a useful road map for moving from patterns of colonization identification to discerning the molecular communication between microbe and host and underlying those patterns.

The early work in squid noted that "in nature, organisms often develop normally only in the presence of associated microorganisms," [@mcfall-ngai1991] a key insight that has contributed to the value of the squid system as a model for associations across the phylogenetic tree.
